enhancement(eslint-plugin): [return-await] add option to report in error-handling scenarios only (#9364)
typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint: packages/eslint-plugin/docs/rules/return-await.mdx

Reviewer: > targeted against main for now

+1 from me on landing this in main. We need to frequently merge into v8 anyway. This way, users in both branches get the option sooner.

Author: @phaux Threading https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/pull/9364#issuecomment-2211750536

> Maybe change the option so that instead of a string it's an object:
> 
> ```ts
> {
>   default: "always" | "never" | "ignore", 
>   inTryCatch?: "always" | "never" | "ignore", // undefined means "same as default" 
> }
> ```
> 
> And make the string options aliases for backward compatibility:
> 
> * "always" - `{ default: "always" }`
> * "in-try-catch" - `{ default: "never", inTryCatch: "always" }`
> * "never" - `{ default: "never" }`
> 
> The new option would be `{ default: "ignore", inTryCatch: "always" }`
> 
> In the future, there could be more conditions added. For example, someone might want to use "always" but make an exception for single-line arrow functions to make them less noisy:
> 
> ```ts
> /* eslint @typescript-eslint/promise-function-async: "error" */
> /* eslint @typescript-eslint/return-await: ["error", { default: "always", inArrowFunction: "ignore" }] */
> 
> promise.then(async (v) => doSomethingAsync(v)) // allowed
> ```

*** 

I think that the options restructure is a potentially a good idea (and +1 to making it non-breaking by providing aliases!) (related - https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/9030#issuecomment-2083721143). But, it's IMO it's unnecessary, and therefore out of scope for this PR. Would you kindly file a separate issue to propose this? Thanks! 🙂

Author: FYI @Josh-Cena, re https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/pull/9364#issuecomment-2224210061, hoping to thread convo here. But regardless, I think this discussion should be deferred to a separate issue if anyone wants to propose it.

## Options

```ts
type Options =
  | 'in-try-catch'
  | 'always'
  | 'error-handling-correctness-only'
  | 'never';

const defaultOptions: Options = 'in-try-catch';
```

The options in this rule distinguish between "ordinary contexts" and "error-handling contexts".
An error-handling context is anywhere where returning an unawaited promise would cause unexpected control flow regarding exceptions/rejections.
See detailed examples in the sections for each option.

- If you return a promise within a `try` block, it should be awaited in order to trigger subsequent `catch` or `finally` blocks as expected.
- If you return a promise within a `catch` block, and there _is_ a `finally` block, it should be awaited in order to trigger the `finally` block as expected.
- If you return a promise between a `using` or `await using` declaration and the end of its scope, it should be awaited, since it behaves equivalently to code wrapped in a `try` block followed by a `finally`.

Ordinary contexts are anywhere else a promise may be returned.

> The choice of whether to await a returned promise in an ordinary context is mostly stylistic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The choice of whether to await a returned promise in an ordinary context is mostly stylistic, except for [stack trace benefits](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await#improving_stack_trace).
```

Author: Hmm. The docs page already mentions this and includes the link at the top of the page, so I'm averse to repeating it here. My intention here was to use "mostly" with the context that the reader has already been told this information.

I think that, beyond this specific line, there's still more room for improvement in coherence of the docs anyway, so are you all right with that being addressed in a followup (perhaps as part of https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/9517?)

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see. Well ignore this then.

With these terms defined, the options may be summarized as follows:

|             Option              | Ordinary Context <br/> (stylistic preference 🎨) |        Error-Handling Context <br/> (catches bugs 🐛)        |                 Should I use this option?                  |
| :-----------------------------: | :----------------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------: |
|             always              |             `return await promise;`              |                   `return await promise;`                    |                          ✅ Yes!                           |
|          in-try-catch           |                `return promise;`                 |                   `return await promise;`                    |                          ✅ Yes!                           |
| error-handling-correctness-only |                  don't care 🤷                   |                   `return await promise;`                    | 🟡 Okay to use, but the above options would be preferable. |

> |              never              |                `return promise;`                 | `return promise;` <br/> (⚠️ This behavior may be harmful ⚠️) |             ❌ No. This option is deprecated.              |

Reviewer: [Docs] Since this is a code thing, maybe?

```suggestion
|              `never`              |                `return promise;`                 | `return promise;` <br/> (⚠️ This behavior may be harmful ⚠️) |             ❌ No. This option is deprecated.              |
```

(& the others)

> 

Reviewer: [Praise] Love this.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ### `error-handling-correctness-only`

Reviewer: [Refactor] I think the table being useful is a symptom of the options being kind of unclear. What do you think about switching this to be a `boolean` option people have to enable with an options object?

```js
"@typescript-eslint/return-await": [
  "error",
  "always",
  { errorHandlingCorrectnessOnly: true }
]
```

Since we'd rather folks use `'always'` or `'in-try-catch'` anyway, I don't mind the mild user pain of an extra object. And I think it'd make the implementation simpler too!

Author: Documenting private conversation - Leaning against this, on the assumption for now that `never` is on its way out (a la https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/pull/9364#discussion_r1651963801), in which case the flat options of (always|in-try-catch|error-handling-correctness-only) do make the most sense

Same as `in-try-catch`, except _only_ enforces Promises be awaited within the
error handling contexts explained under that option. Outside of error-handling

> contexts, returned Promises are ignored, whether awaited or not.

Reviewer 2: Don't wrap lines by line width

Author: Huh. not sure how that happened. In any case this has been fixed/superseded 👍

:::warning
We recommend you configure either `in-try-catch` or `always` instead of this option.

> While the choice or awaiting or not awaiting promises outside of error-handling contexts is mostly stylistic, it is best to be consistent.

Reviewer: [Docs] Grammar/typo fix, and a bit of clarity:

```suggestion
While the choice of whether to awaiting promises outside of error-handling contexts is mostly stylistic, it's generally best to be consistent.
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Options Summary

> |             Option              | Ordinary Context <br/> (stylistic preference) | Error Handling Context <br/> (catches subtle control flow bugs) |                       Should I use?                        |

Reviewer: [Docs] I think this table is pretty useful. Proposal: how about moving this to within the `## Options` early on, to prime folks with it before they dive into the options?

I also think it would be useful to mention _in each option's section_ the pros & cons of that option. Right now, the `always` section just says _"Requires that all returned promises are `await`ed."_. It doesn't mention the option being preferred, or why it's preferred.

Author: > Proposal: how about moving this to within the `## Options` early on, to prime folks with it before they dive into the options?

Yeah, that was actually my first approach, but i was waffling on how to go about defining an error-handling context since that's required before the table... and I went with this approach out of laziness. I agree that putting it first would be better, though, so I'll give it another stab 🙂 

> I also think it would be useful to mention _in each option's section_ the pros & cons of that option. Right now, the `always` section just says _"Requires that all returned promises are `await`ed."_. It doesn't mention the option being preferred, or why it's preferred.

Feels like we're venturing into scope creep territory, but at the same time, we probably don't want this option to go out without good supporting docs 🤔 Will try to incorporate this 👍

Author: I made changes in this area. I definitely think the result is much better! Thanks for making the suggestions.

| :-----------------------------: | :-------------------------------------------: | :-------------------------------------------------------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------: |
|             always              |            `return await promise;`            |                     `return await promise;`                     |                          ✅ Yes!                           |
|          in-try-catch           |               `return promise;`               |                     `return await promise;`                     |                          ✅ Yes!                           |
| error-handling-correctness-only |                 don't care 🤷                 |                     `return await promise;`                     | 🟡 Okay to use, but the above options would be preferable. |

> |              never              |               `return promise;`               |                        `return promise;`                        |                           ❌ No!                           |

Reviewer: [Docs]

> ❌ No!

Well, if the option should _never_ be used... why would we want to include it at all? It's not clear from this table or the <code>## \`never\`</code> section why we have that. Maybe a solution to this would be to mention that `never` is only included for compatibility with the base rule?

Author: Documenting a private conversation for visibility:

***

> `never` is only included for compatibility with the base rule

There is no evidence that this is or ever was the case; see https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/994.

***

Plan to resolve this comment - tentative plan to deprecate 'never' as part of this PR. Getting that process started imminently.

Author: filed https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/9433

Author: Incorporated #9433 into this PR
